Files are the primary way that we store data persistently, and often are how we transport information between applications which are not directly engineered to communicate. For example, we can transfer image files between any number of browser web apps, any number of image editing apps, and any number of photo viewers pretty seamlessly, despite none of them having been designed to work together in any special way.

So it's about damn time that we start learning to work with file input and output.

# File IO from Programs

To use a file from our program, we need to *open* that file. When a file is open, we have a *handle* on that file. The operating system takes special measures to manage files which are opened in multiple locations, though -- we really don't want two processes writing to the same file at the same time, as that is a surefire way to get data corruption. If you're curious why, look up the phrase "race condition".

Two processes may both read the file at the same time, though -- that's no problem. But what about reading and writing at the same time? It might not corrupt the file but it is sort of risky to the process doing the reading.

So, we also need to specify what *mode* we are opening that file in. This is usually "r" for read, "w" for write and "a" for appending. When we have a file handle in a specific mode, the OS keeps track of it, and throws errors to other processes attempting to get a handle in a mode that is incompatible with the current state of things. More generally, the OS makes sure that the current user has the right permissions to open that file in that mode.

Then, we have a "file pointer" which points to a specific location in the file. Usually this begins at the beginning of the file. This file pointer is essentially like where our pencil is hovering above a sheet of paper -- wherever it is when we write (or read) is where we will start writing (or reading) those bytes, and at the end of that write, our file pointer is now pointing at the end of what we just wrote (or read). We can also "seek" around the file using numerical positions to find a specific place. 

When we open in "append" mode, the file pointer is automatically placed at the end of the file. This means that, unless we change the pointer manually, any writes we make should be added to the end of the file, not replacing it. Note that append and read modes will fail if the file does not exist, while write mode will create the file first.

There is a "+" mode which can be added to any other mode. This mode adds the *other* permission between reading/writing. On that note, "a" is basically "w" but with *truncation* disabled. *Truncation* just means that the file is totally replaced. So use "w" if you need to replace a file, "a" if you want to either edit a file or add to the end.

There is an additional mode, "b", which can also be added. This is used to indicate that you are writing in binary mode (as opposed to text mode). This doesn't actually matter on Linux, but on Windows it prevents some stupid automatic translation stuff that the OS does automatically in "text" mode. **As a rule of thumb, open in binary mode**. By the time you want text mode you will have a better idea of what you are doing anyway. If you're really that curious, it has to do with newline translation on Windows and text encoding/decoding.

For a look at built-in functions to do file I/O in C, take a look at [this guide](https://www.cprogramming.com/tutorial/cfileio.html). But personally, I think those functions are a little low-level for our needs. I recommend the C++ functions which are described [here](https://cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/files/). In Python, the basic file I/O and string-writing APIs are high level enough that they will be useful in general.

In Python, you might write code like:
``` python
with open("C:/ProgramOutput.txt", "w") as f:
	f.write("Blah\n")
	lines = ["One", "Two", "Three"]
	f.WriteLines(lines)

# We don't need an f.close() because the "with" block auto-closes the file upon exit.
```
The "with" block here is something you may not have seen before. It has a more general meaning, but here, just know that it lets you automatically close a file when you exit the indented block. 

# File Formats
As discussed in the basic computing review, a "file extension" is just a conventional way to label a file in its name to indicate what kind of file it is. But a *file format* is something different. A file format describes how a file's content is laid out. Using knowledge of this file format, our program can interpret the contents meaningfully.

Generally, most common file formats have libraries to read and write them. For instance, you would hardly ever want to write code to write the bytes into a PNG image manually. Instead, someone who researched the format (or invented the format) would translate that format *specification* into code which actually does the writing/reading (and probably does some common forms of error-checking).

That being said, in this course, we will probably not need to manually write code to handle a custom or unknown file format at the level of reading specific bytes and such. Instead, we should look to existing libraries if dealing with existing file types, or use more powerful general-purpose ways to serialize data into files if we are making a new type of file. However, if you do need to write your own library for reading or writing a file type, you should be able to do that if given a proper specification of the format.

In Python, you can use the `pickle` package to turn arbitrary Python objects into ".pkl" files and load them later. In C or C++, you could always just dump an object's binary content into a file, and at load-time, dump that same data into a pointer to the object. In other words you might *cast* the binary data into the desired object type. Obviously, this will break in undefined ways if your object's format changes.

The JSON and YAML formats are common modern ways to transmit mostly arbitrary data in text form. YAML is slightly more modern and less syntactically strict. Many web APIs return data in JSON format. Another language used for such purposes is XML (the eXtensible Markup Language). 














