We're here to discuss immediate differences between Python and the C/C++ world we've been engaging in so far.

First, *variables do not have a type and do not need to be declared separately*. In Python, you just say `a = 4`, you don't need type declarations. Wherever you first define a variable is its scope. However, each type does have type information associated with it, so you can call `type(object)` to find out the type of the variable's value.

Second, Python is interpreted, not compiled. We discussed this early on. What it means is that you have one central interpreter process which runs Python code files (usually ".py"). This means that type-related errors and other such things occur at run time when they occur, not at compile time. So you have to be ready for these whether it's as a user or a developer.

Third, *almost everything is a reference*. This isn't as confusing as you might expect, because everything can be decomposed to its value when needed. In general, if `b = someObject` and `a = b` then changes to `a` will affect `b` as well. The exceptions are primitives ints and floats like `4` or `5.6666`, strings like `"bepis"` and tuples. These objects are immutable, and a new copy will be created if they are changed. But if a tuple contains a reference to another thing (like almost any other object in the language), that reference will be copied. Lists, on the other hand, are mutable, so if `a` and `b` point to the same list, changing it will affect both. What this also results in is that we never have to manage memory ourselves (i.e., no `new` or `delete` or `malloc`). Instead, the Python Garbage Collector finds objects which no longer have any references to them and cleans them up during runtime. Hence you can pretty freely just create objects and forget about them, like wizards do with shotguns.

Fourth, *whitespace is significant*. Unlike in C++, where everything is delineated by curly braces and could in theory all be on one line, Python takes line indentation to be significant. Do NOT mix up tabs and spaces! If you need to, use Notepad++ to visualize tabs/spaces and use the utilities in its settings to replace all.

Fifth, *there is no linking.* Importing code is literally reading source code directly. For this reason, modules aren't really "bundled into your finished executable" like they might be in C++ -- instead, you need Python packages installed even on the user's computer (and their Python needs to be able to see them). You can sometimes avoid this by using programs designed to "freeze"/"package"/"compile" Python code, but this can be scary for beginners. FWIW, we will have a lab about using dependencies in Python later.

Sixth, *there is "duck typing"*. Since there is no type checking, when you call a function on an object, the only thing that matters in whether that succeeds is whether the object has a function with that name. This is useful because any two objects with an identically-named function are interchangeable in that respect. But it does mean you give up the safety provided by the type system. As a side note, individual objects can have functions "added to them", meaning that even two objects of the same nominal type can behave differently from each other... Spooky!

Seventh, *there is no header/implementation divide*. Function and class definitions in Python are actually *just* code that is run (so running that code again defines the function again). This also means that you can define functions in interesting places.

The above are the major departures from stuff we have done so far. Python code is considered very easy to write, sort of "close to plain English". The syntax is often very forgiving. And its module system is widely considered easy to use.






