In this segment, we will first replicate a few common patterns in Python, then we will learn some Python-specific ways of working.

I am not going to teach you basic syntax for how to do things in Python unless *something* new conceptually is introduced. For direct syntax, look it up online. Learning how to word these searches is nice, and moreover, looking at the results will teach you how other developers talk and think about these concepts. Naturally, this skill is key to understanding technical conversations and documentation. I am being redundant with how I mention this every few pages because it is *that* important.

# Old Stuff Revisited

## Function Parameters

One big difference that you might not have expected is that Python functions can be given arguments as keywords. For example, if there is a function with some arguments:
``` python
def MyCoolFunction(firstParam = 1, secondParam = 2, thirdParam = 3):
	pass # Python-speak for "do nothing, this is a placeholder"
```
Then I can call that function and specify which arguments are which:
``` python
result = MyCoolFunction()
result = MyCoolFunction(secondParam=55)
```

This is pretty essential to a lot of Python code so we mentioned it first. It's a great convenience too.

## Collections and Iterating Over Them:

Lists and Dicts are the most common collection types in Python:
``` python
# List object
aList = [1, 2, 3] 
# Dict object -- basically a std::map or HashMap, but types aren't fixed.
aDict = {"name1": 2, "name2": aList}
```
And you can iterate over items in those with a nice syntax:

``` python
for item in aList:
	print(item)
```

And if you have lists of tuples, you can get multiple at a time:
``` python
pairs = [(1, 9), (2, 8), (3, 7), (4, 6)]
for left, right in pairs:
	print(left)
	print(right)
```

For other for-loops, we usually use the same syntax, but create a generic *range* to represent our iterator:
``` python
for i in range(10):
	# We can use i as a counter for other purposes besides iterating through collections
	# (or for iterating through multiple collections at once...)
	print(i)
```
Ranges can take various parameters and there are variants like `xrange` so keep an eye out.

When we need both our items and the associated index, we can use `enumerate`:
``` python
for index, value in enumerate(pairs):
	print(index)
	print(value)
```
But you can imagine another way of doing this, I'm sure.

## Including other files
The `import` keyword lets you run code from other packages installed on your machine, as well as other files you yourself have written. `import` runs the code from that script file. Since this includes any function definitions, you will then have access to those functions in the module scope:
``` python
import something
something.functionA()

# You can import specific symbols into the *current* scope
from somethingelse import SomeOtherCoolFunction
SomeOtherCoolFunction()

# Or can change the symbol used to refer to the module:
import antigravity as ag
```

You may have code in a script file which you don't want to run on import, only when run as an entrypoint script. 
In that case, you must rely on something called a "magic" variable in Python. The variable `__name__`in Python is one example of the (many) magic variables. Like most magic variables, it is related to the internal workings of the Python interpreter, and begins with two underscores as a sort of ward against accidental use. As an aside, prefixing variables with an underscore in general is a very common way to mark private variables, both in Python and in C++ for similar reasons. Anyway, when a script is run as an entrypoint, `__name__` is set to have the value "`__main__`". So we might have a file `mycoolmodule.py`

``` python
def SomeCoolFunction():
	pass

mySpecialNumber = 3.1459

if __name__ == "__main__":
	doSomeStuff()
	makeSomeFiles()
	clutterUpMyPC()
```
With this in place, none of the code in that block will run if imported, so we can `import mycoolmodule`, and use `SomeCoolFunction` and `mySpecialNumber` without running those. But if we run `mycoolmodule.py` directly, that code will execute.

# New Stuff

## Tuples
Tuples exist in C++, too, so let's briefly cover that: they are templated classes which can contain objects of any (fixed, ordered) set of classes. So `std::tuple<int, float, Color>` will contain an `int`, `float`, and `Color` in that order. Newer versions of C++ let you use these values much more naturally, but some versions require you to use very ugly `std::get<0>(mytuple)` calls to index into the tuple.
In Python, though, the use of tuples is far more common, even implicit in many cases.

You create a tuple in python with `(value1, value2)`, but this isn't limited to 2. You can just as easily have `(value1, value2, value3)`.  Tuples are also held as immutable in Python -- any changes to them create a new copy of them. But note that this does **not** require new copies of the objects inside.

For example, if a function returns a tuple, we can immediately decompose the tuple to basically get multiple return values:
``` python
def returnsTwoThings():
	return (45, 98)

a, b = returnsTwoThings()
```

## Slice Indexing
So, just like in C/C++, we can often use the square brackets to index into a collection like a list.
``` python
a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
b = a[0]
a[0] = "beans"
print(a)
print(b)
```
But in Python we have built-in support for more complex indexing. We can use a *slice* to get a certain subset of the original collection, or to step through it in a specific way:
``` python
c = a[1:] # Get everything from element 1 onward as a new list
print(c)
d = a[-1] # Get the last element only
print(d)
e = a[2:4] # Return the elements from indexes 2-4 as a new list
print(e)
# Let's break down the next one.
# We start at -1, step by -1 each time, and end at 0.
# So we start at the end, go backwards by one each time, and stop at the beginning.
f = a[-1:0:-1] # Get a new list in reverse order
# or try this way:
f = a[::-1]
print(f)
```
The most general syntax for slicing is `[start:end:step]`.
You can really get some neat effects using these slices, like passing a value greater than 1 into the "step" segment to only get an item for every N items in the larger list... lots of ideas there.

## List Comprehensions
When working with lists and dicts, you can use a *comprehension* which generates a new list (or dict) based on logic all in one line. For example:
``` python
a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
b = [i+5 for i in a if (a % 2) == 0]
# b is now [7, 9, 11, 13, 15]

# Similarly for dicts, we extract key-value pairs into a tuple first
lookupTable = {"e" = 2.71828, "pi" = 3.1459, "zero" = 0}
onlyFloatLookupTable = {key:value for (key, value) in lookupTable.items() if (type(value).__name__ == "float")}
``` 
These condense potentially quite a few multi-line operations into nicely readable one-liners.

# Notes on Pythonic Style

You may have noticed that Python code has stylistic differences from C/C++, even after considering the raw change in syntax. "Pythonic" is the Python community's way of designating a pattern of code as the preferred way to do something -- even if it's achievable otherwise, the "Pythonic" way is desirable (if not for performance, then for keeping code looking uniform).

The biggest difference I would mention is that Python makes lists and dicts extremely powerful. It might not surprise you to learn that *all* objects in Python are actually a type of thing similar to a dictionary, with symbolic names mapping to data and functions freely. This tendency to use lists for many things leads Python toward a somewhat data-driven style. There are a lot of functions in the standard library which help to manipulate lists in various ways. For example, rather than using a nested loop to cover every pairwise combination of two lists, you might use `itertools.product(a, b)`:

``` python
import itertools

a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
b = ["apple", "banana", "orange"]
product = itertools.product(a, b)

for a, b in product:
	print(b * a)
```
This creates a single list where each element is a tuple containing the pairwise combinations of elements from those lists. Then you only need one loop to cover every combination. In general (even beyond Python), avoiding deeply nested code is a good idea for readability.

Of course, as we've mentioned, lists can contain multiple elements of unrelated types:
``` python
thing = SomeReallyHugeComplicatedThing()
listA = [1, "beans", thing]
```

This, of course, means that lists can contain other lists:
``` python
listB = [listA, 1, 2, 3]
print(listB)
# Will print something like:
# [[1, "beans", <SomeReallyHugeComplicatedThing instance at 0xBEEFBABEDEADBEEF>], 1, 2, 3]
```
It is very common to use these to represent 2 (or more) dimensional matrices of elements.





