Congratulations on finishing the lab. It may have been a little difficult, but you have just taken an important step: translating your basic programming skills to another language. You generally need this for both analysis of code snippets and for writing new code. This can be very difficult as a beginner, so good job! Hopefully, though, you have also realized that the hard part is in understanding the concepts and coming up with solutions, not in writing the code down. In fact, an **extremely frequent** event at work for me is doing a Google search for something like "while loop in Python" or some other programming construct that I know a name for, but for which I don't know the syntax. I can't be assed to memorize all the syntax and neither should you. Just be able to describe the kind of logic or programming construct that you need, and be ready to learn from new patterns that you see. For everything else, there are reference materials.

We didn't learn Python so far because there is the (very real) possibility for it to teach beginners bad habits. The biggest example I can think of is the fact that it hides the concept of references, and often makes it just seem like magical bullshit. This is why that section was so long, to impress the point. 

Now that you have learned C and C++ to some degree, you can be trusted to understand Python without it obscuring the concepts too much. I suspect most students will find Python a bit more comfortable, and there is no shame in using it.

Once you complete this lab, you may complete assignments in Python or C++, at your preference. However, I may provide code samples in either language at *my* preference, so be prepared to translate. Doing this translation, checking your work, and considering if there are any differences between the two, is seriously excellent practice.