This will be brief and highlight only key features, because there are a shitload of features in Visual Studio, and a lot of them will be meaningless to you at this stage (and very possibly forever). For a more complete tutorial on it, look online. This applies to everything here -- you can spend a lot of time learning every little feature of the IDE, but I generally think it's a waste of time unless you already know you need a specific thing.

The visual studio IDE is highly customizable. Therefore, to explain the user interface, I can only explain defaults -- if you move stuff around or delete them I can't really help you with that. Note that if a window is ever missing, you can go to the Window menu on the menu bar to re-enable it.

The "Solution Explorer" is on the right side and shows you your "solution". A "solution" in (very) Microsoft terms is a collection of "Projects". Each "Project" represents basically one buildable thing, such as a library or executable. Of course, you can have projects that rely on other projects. Right now, you should only have one project with some generic name like "Console Application" which contains only one file ("main.cpp" or something like that). "Building" your project just means compiling it and anything it depends on. In this case, your project will build into one executable file. As projects grow more complex with multiple components, your solution will also grow. 

But maintaining a huge complex solution with multiple projects in Visual Studio itself is tough for various reasons. In a later lab we will discuss alternative build systems which are a bit more flexible and configurable. For you curious ones out there, I'm talking about *make*, *qmake* and *CMake*. The prime use-case for this is in making cross-platform software, because Microsoft's support for this leaves a lot to be desired, but it's also useful for when you have teammates who may not necessarily be using Visual Studio.

Back to the UI. The code editor is in the middle-left and is just that: a text editor. You can open multiple files at a time in this editor. 

The bottom pane contains output from any build processes. You should use this output when figuring out why your program won't compile. Often, copying the last line of output into Google will get you helpful results.

Up top are a lot of buttons and menus. There are a couple you should care about. 
One is the configuration manager. It consists of two dropdown boxes. One says "Release" or "Debug" (probably defaulting to Debug) and the other probably says "Win32" or "x64". This basically is used to configure how your application will be compiled, and for which platform -- by default, the one you are on. (It's possible to set things up so that you can cross-compile for a platform different than your own, but this is usually not well supported).

"Debug" vs "Release" is more interesting. What does that even mean?

Basically, most compilers today are so-called *optimizing compilers*. In the process of figuring out how to turn your code into an executable, the compiler can make optimizations, including specific optimizations for your target platform. The compiler might unroll loops, perform "copy elision" to remove unnecessary copies, operate on multiple items of data at once using special processor instructions... the list goes on, but the point is that the process your code describes might not be followed *exactly* as written. Most of the time this doesn't actually functionally change your code, although there are rare exceptions. 

The Release mode of compilation is made for distribution -- it is built by signaling the compiler to turn on the most aggressive optimizations. Release mode also strips out any *debug info* built into the program. *Debug info* is basically a table of symbols, bundled into the binary file, which helps correlate parts of the executable back to the original source code. Naturally, executables built in Debug mode include this info. Debug info also typically makes it *much* easier to reverse engineer an application. For proprietary code this is usually undesirable. Also, debug info is usually quite big, so it bloats the size of the executable. Sometimes, debug info is provided as a separate file, often a .pdb in the Windows world. Anyway, a *debugger* uses this info to get even more information about the state of the program as it runs. Note that nothing stops you from attaching a debugger to a running program without debug info... just that what you see might not have nice human-readable names.

In the next portion of this lab, we will begin debugging some of our own programs.





