Visual Studio allows you to run a program you are editing either with or without a debugger automatically attached (note the two "Play" buttons up near the top). Try taking the Hello World example and running it in a debugger.

When you do, your program will launch. But if your program finishes immediately, you'll find it difficult to actually do any debugging.

We can place a *breakpoint* by simply clicking on the left-hand margin near a line of code. This marks that line as a breakpoint for the debugger. You'll know you did it when a red circle appears in that margin. (If a white circle appears, this means that Visual Studio can't find code associated with that line -- usually a rebuild is sufficient to solve this).

Whenever code would execute corresponding to that line, execution will stop and your debugger will be updated with new information about the state of the program. You will know you are at a specific breakpoint because that breakpoint's red circle will now also have a yellow arrow inside it. Note that the VS UI changes a little bit: You should be now also be able to see variables on the bottom left, and the call stack on the bottom right. You might need to click through tabs to see these.

Up near the menu bar, a couple more options have become selectable: "Step over", "step in", and "step out". These buttons let you "step" the program forward in a couple of different ways, "Step over" treats the next instruction on the current line of code as a single instruction to step over. "Step in" will go finer in detail, and will bring you to "inside" any function calls, explicit or implicit, on the current line. "Step out" does the opposite, stepping out to whatever the caller of your current function is.

You use the above controls to navigate through your program -- usually, the call stack is also a good way to visualize and shortcut to different levels of execution too (remember, the call stack is the stack recording the entire chain of function calls, all the way up to the program entrypoint at `main`. Worth noting, you can always either start execution again, or set another breakpoint somewhere else in your code. From the "breakpoints" menu, which is usually a tab on the bottom right, you can disable specific breakpoints until you need them again. When the program is running, you can always pause at any arbitrary time (or stop, if you are finished debugging). One thing to note is that source code may not always be available for functions you step into. If this is the case, it will usually say so and prompt you for debug info (which you probably will not have).

In the variables menu, you can view, or even edit, the values of variables in memory. These may be labeled "autos" or "locals", and this menu should show whatever is relevant for the current function -- viewing stuff allocated elsewhere, on the heap, might be a little more difficult. In any event, doing this is a great way to understand, step by step, how variables are changing as your program proceeds.

Also when debugging you may see a basic outline of memory, CPU usage and running time. This should be pretty much self explanatory, but you can expand the info to get more details.

That's the basic rundown. I **strongly** encourage you to use the debugger when running examples from this course to help better your understanding. Obviously, this doesn't apply to deliberately incomplete code snippets (such as ones which call functions I consider immaterial to the example and leave undefined like `rattleBones() or kamehameha()`). But you should get in the habit of replacing such dummy functions with placeholder implementations so that you can debug the examples, *especially* if they don't make intuitive sense to you. 

## Quick note on Python

For what it's worth, you can debug Python, too. Check out this page in the documentation:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html
This is a shell-like debugger, which requires you to input debugger-specific commands when the program is at a breakpoint (like `p x` to print the value of variable `x`, or  `continue` to continue execution). This type of debugger can be quite powerful once you know what you are doing.


