Let's do some exercises. Please place your code and/or responses in your Git repo as normal.

Write a program that takes an input *argument* with some text and that writes this text to a file. (Do not use shell output redirectors for this). To keep it simple, it doesn't have to have some complex way of signaling options. Let's just say that the first argument received is the string to write and leave it at that.

While testing your program, you may be a little confused -- you know how to run the program from Visual Studio, but how do you provide command-line parameters? Right click your project, go to Properties. Under "Debugging" there should be a field that allows you to pass in command-line arguments and parameters. Edit that, save and apply.

Actually, along similar lines, try running your compiled program from the build directory directly from a terminal. As a forewarning, it may fail. If it does, show me the error and tell me what it means -- why did it fail?

Now modify your above program. The second argument that the program receives should be a filename. The program should write to the file with that name, using the text provided in the first argument.

## Writing non-text data and understanding file content
OK, you've written some text data. Now let's try to deepen our understanding. Remember when we talked about data types and how numbers are represented in binary? 

First, use `sizeof(int)` and `sizeof(float)` to find out how big these two numerical types are in bytes.

Create a program which takes an integer (doesn't have to be as input, although it can be) and writes two different files. The first file should contain the integer as text, the second file should contain the integer as a number.
If this is confusing to you, consider the difference between a `std::string` which contains text representing an integer, and `int` -- what happens when you write these to a file? How can you write these types of data? 

When your program works, create files in this way for the following numbers: 3, 44, and 4000000.

For each set of files you created, compare the sizes of these two files using your favorite utilities. Explain what you see.

Now, create a program (or two, depending on your preference) which takes the files you just wrote and reproduces the original number. Make sure you verify that the number is correct using a print statement or something along those lines.

## Turning up the difficulty
Above, you have written simple programs that manipulate files with both statically known and dynamically provided names, and write very simple content.

Many tasks in software ultimately come down to writing files in various formats. While the specific formats used are a little beyond the scope of this course (we aren't teaching a course on specifics of the PNG format...), you *should* have some practice in serializing and deserializing potentially arbitrary data.

What better way than to use our very own custom data types?

You should first create a class of data to serialize. `Color` is acceptable as a simple use case, although you may use your own class if you like (perhaps a `PlayerCharacter` with a stat sheet?). Before we begin, make sure to use the `sizeof` function to get the size of your class in bytes.  

Now, write two programs:
One which takes as input an object instance of this class and writes it to a file as some kind of text. This is the "encoder".
Another which takes such a file and reproduces a copy of the original object and does some basic operations on it to prove that it works (the "decoder").

After that, write another set of two programs which do the same, but write the object to file as binary instead.
If you like, you can merge these all these programs into one.

When you are finished, check the size of the files for your object. Explain what you see.
Which program(s) were easiest to write? Did text or binary representations need any additional care?

Also, now that you've written files, what happens if you change the class definition and then re-load a file from a previous compilation+run? For instance, if you used `Color`, swap the order of `r` and `g`, recompile, and load the existing file. What happens? What happens if you add (or remove) a variable from the class definition?

## Writing collections of arbitrary size

So we've written some basic code to serialize a single object to a single file. 

Your next challenge is to write a program which can load an arbitrarily-sized collection of your data type. For example, if you used `Color` for the previous section, then you should be able to write, read (and print, for verification) a list, array or vector of `Color` objects. Your decoder program should *not* have built-in information about the size of the list. That is, I should be able to write 5 colors to a file, pass the file to the decoder, and the decoder should recreate those 5 instances. Without recompiling the decoder, if I pass another file with a different amount of colors (say 8), the decoder should be able to load all 8 colors.

What approach do you take? Where "is" the information about the amount of colors to load?

## Object-oriented serialization
One approach to serialization is to define a *serialize* function in each class you are interested in serializing. You can also define a similar deserialization function. For instance:
``` cpp
class Color {
int r, g, b;

public:
// Object-bound function, a.k.a a "method"
void serialize(std::ofstream& stream) {
	stream << r << g << b;
}

void deserialize(std::ifstream& stream) {
	stream >> r;
	stream >> g;
	stream >> b;
}
};

// Free function
void serialize(std::ofstream& toStream, Color& color) {
	color.serialize(toStream);
}
/* Alternatively, you could just make a free function which does it directly:
serialize(std::ofstream& toStream, Color& color) {
	toStream << color.r << color.g << color.b;
}
*/
Color deserialize(std::ifstream& fromStream) {
    Color result;
    result.deserialize(fromStream);
    return result;
}
/* Lots of potential design choices here...
One way is to take a Color reference and modify that color.
void deserialize(std::ifstream& fromStream, Color& color) {
	fromStream >> color.r;
	fromStream >> color.g;
	fromStream >> color.b;
}
Or even combine the approaches:
Color& deserialize(std::ifstream fromStream, Color& color) {
	fromStream >> color.r;
	fromStream >> color.g;
	fromStream >> color.b;
	return color;
}
*/

int main() {
	
	// Encoder part
	auto output = std::ofstream("colors.bin");
	Color red = { 255, 0, 0 };
	Color green = { 0, 255, 0 };
	Color blue = { 0, 0, 255 };
	serialize(output, red);
	serialize(output, blue);
	serialize(output, green);
	output.close()

	// Decoder part
	auto input = std::ifstream("colors.bin");
	for (int i = 0; !input.eof(); i++) {
		input >> r;
		input >> g;
		input >> b;
		std::cout << "Color " << i << ": {" << r << ", " << g << ", " << b << "}" << std::endl;
	}

	input.close();
	
}
```

Try to visualize this and the alternatives I've provided. What are the differences? Specifically, think about the call stack and where data is located.

## And this is to go even further beyond!
Here we'll tackle some more advanced concepts. I encourage you to first think conceptually about these problems and then try to do some implementation. Pen-and-paper might help here because these can be some potentially very deep rabbit holes to go down.

In general, first think about what happens in our above code. What *really* is happening when we "save" and "load" an object? 

What happens if the object you are copying has a pointer or reference to another object? For example, if I serialize a `PlayerCharacter` object, which holds a reference to an `Item` object. What would happen? How might we solve this?
What if multiple `PlayerCharacter`s hold a reference/pointer to the same `Item` object? Would this cause any issues?
What if the `Item` object also holds a reference/pointer to its holder/owner? Does this present any problems? 

What if I am trying to deserialize / load some objects of mixed types?
For example, we have a class `Vehicle` which has subclasses `Plane` , `Car` and `Boat`. Each of these may have separate implementations for `serialize` and `deserialize`. Anyway, I have a mixed collection of these, a `std::vector<Vehicle*>`. What is/are the problem(s) with this scenario? How can I implement my  encoder and decoder?
