We have just gained some experience with writing code that lets us both read arbitrary data, and put arbitrary data into files. 

We might think of file editing as essentially "lifting" concrete information on disk into an abstract world where we can rearrange it (i.e. our program) and then re-planting it in the concrete world. We are extracting, transforming, and then replacing. An incredible amount of software falls into this category. So, it'd be to our benefit to learn how to do this for some real type of data that is floating around in our real world.

Choose a file type that is of interest to you. Do your research online and find out as much as possible about the file format (try to research something open rather than proprietary). Write down your findings. 

What tasks would you need to tackle in order to read, or write, such a file format? Use your information from above to synthesize a skeleton for the code you would use to load a file of that type, do some edits, and then write the file back. **You do not actually need to write the code yet**. Just determine at least the following:

Are there any major sections to the file type?  Does it follow any sort of consistent structure?

Does it contain metadata or additional fields besides its primary content? Are these necessary or unnecessary to use the file?
What is the data-level representation of the primary content? For an image, it might be an array of RGB values.

What classes would you need in your code to represent the data present in the file?

Are there any magic numbers or offsets inside the file data that you would need to use?

What type of transformations might you be interested in doing on the data? 

What steps would you take to take the data and put it into writable format?

Present your findings to me on your Git repo and ping me to look at them.