Remember, Python packages are just collections of code, which needs to be interpreted. So when you install those, they actually exist as code files on your computer, somewhere.

Your Python installation has a built-in standard library of packages which you can import (it has these both in a system-wide location, and in a user-specific location). For instance, you don't need to install anything (besides Python itself) to import and use the "yaml" package, or the "multiprocessing" package.

However, you can of course install code that isn't bundled in the standard library. To do this, you need to find a repository for it. The most common and officially supported package index is PyPI, which indexes almost all major Python packages. When you use the `pip` tool, which exists to help you install packages, it automatically looks in PyPI for the code repo with the associated name. So if I wanted to install the package called `numpy`, I would run `pip install numpy` from my command line. 

You can also specify specific versions of a package to install, like `pip install numpy==1.12.0`. 

But keep in mind that you as a programmer have no control over what packages your end-user has installed. You basically need to provide them a list of packages (and versions) to install. Sometimes this comes in the form of just a "requirements.txt" file which can be used with `pip install -r requirements.txt`, and sometimes it comes in the form of an automated installation. What that requires is to build your code into a certain format, then upload it to PyPI. We will cover this briefly in another lab about software packaging.

... But Python distribution is considered annoying for a reason. Have you realized why, yet?

I can't install two packages on my machine at the same time without making the name ambiguous in my source code as to which one I mean. And I certainly don't want to care *in my code* about which specific version I am using! Ugh, this is a mess, especially if I have two Python scripts that need different versions of the same package.

One way to get around this is to create separate *Python environments* in your machine. You can do this with some variation of:
``` PowerShell
python -m venv env_for_myprogram
```
Which will create a directory, "env_for_myprogram" in the current directory. To use it, you run `./env_for_myprogram/Scripts/Activate` from your terminal. As long as that environment is active (which is as long as you are executing commands from that same terminal window or until you explicitly deactivate it), any commands you run will affect only *this environment*. So you can `pip install` packages into just that environment and they won't affect any other Python on your machine. On the flip side this means you can have packages just taking up space in some random place on your machine, so, you know, clean up after yourself.

I wouldn't worry about this stuff for this course. But if you ever start working on multiple Python projects it can be a lifesaver.






