This lab is primarily about how to create programs which consist of multiple separate files.
So far, you have probably had only 1 file per project in Visual Studio, something like "main.cpp".

In the majority of languages, there is no limit to how long or complex a single code file can be. Indeed, in your .cpp files so far, you have probably defined multiple classes, multiple functions, and your main entry point in a single file. All programs can be defined using just one lump of text, so this makes sense.

But as you can imagine, scrolling through a 10,000+ line file of various unrelated software components is not fun, nor maintainable long term. 

So most languages encourage splitting projects into multiple files -- if for nothing else, it helps to cluster related components together, so you at least have a rough place to look for whatever you need to find at any given time.

In the basic computing review, we also considered constructing *libraries* from source code. *Libraries* are not executable programs because they have no entry point, but are compiled collections of code. Multiple executables can use the same libraries. If source code can be split into multiple files containing clusters of related source code, then we can think of compiled programs as being split into multiple binary files (executables and libraries) containing clusters of related compiled code. Each of these binary objects can correlated to multiple source code files. In the VS world, each of these binary objects would be built by one project.

In any event, we want to be able to create complex, large programs which rely on multiple modules or files. Furthermore, we know we need some way to create links between our executable programs and the libraries they rely on (whether we have made them ourselves, or someone else has provided them).

We will learn to do this in this lab for C++ projects. In a later lab, we will learn to do this for Python as well.



