This lecture is a basic review of concepts in computing and information technology.

A strong understanding of these will make the rest of the course and future tasks much easier. Also included are concepts in working from the command line. I recommend reviewing these concepts.


## Definitions

A *file* is a collection of data in one unit. Files can be executable programs, or they can be documents. You are probably also familiar with the concept of a *file type*. A file generally has some kind of meaning, and the file type describes what that meaning is. Often (especially in Windows) the file type is conflated with the *file extension*, such as ".jpg", ".gif", ".webm" and so on. However, the topic is more complex. Usually, a file extension is just there for convenience and for programs to easily identify files which have the meaning they want to operate on. Windows uses this also to associate file extensions with a default program (so that if you double-click a .jpeg in your files, it will open up the photo viewer). But note that a file's content has nothing to do with its extension besides convention. For example, a JPEG viewer software may refuse to load a .mp3 file that has been renamed to a .jpeg, but this is because it is looking for a known header or structure to the data. If it fails to find it, it will alert you and error out. But software that doesn't perform these checks (like Windows' Notepad) can easily load any data and try to show it to you. This will show you the binary data of the file, interpreted in a different way (as text for Notepad, RGB values for an image viewer, etc.)

A *directory* (sometimes *folder*) is a tree-like structure which *contains* files. Files exist at different levels of the hierarchy. The "root" directory is at the highest level, and all other directories exist under it. A directory under (or inside) another directory is a *subdirectory*. 

The *filesystem* refers to the whole set of directories and files. The filesystem manages permissions and also how this data is formatted (including how it is physically arranged on the drive).

A *process* is an *instance* of a running program or task. An executable file is a program, but is not a process. Only the thing created by *running* the program is a process. In order to *run* a program, the operating system needs to load the executable program into memory, and reserve any space needed, then follow the instructions in the program. Sometimes, processes run other processes to achieve certain tasks. These are referred to as *child processes*.

*Memory* exists at multiple levels. Hardware memory is the chip in which data is stored. Usually, like in the case of RAM, this memory is volatile -- without power, it will be forgotten. Hence, this memory only persists while the computer is running.  While the computer is running, the operating system and programs it runs will reserve portions of the physical hardware memory. The operating system is responsible for orchestrating this. When a program requests 1 megabyte of memory, it is the operating system which determines where it actually is (or, indeed, whether it reserves memory at all).

The *operating system* is the software which lies closest to the hardware. At its core, the operating system has a *kernel*. The kernel is responsible for all core operations and for hardware interaction. For instance, although at a high level you may press "New file", actually creating a new file in the filesystem is done by the kernel. Actually talking to the physical memory chip to change its contents is initiated by the kernel. In that sense, all software is running "on top of" the operating system. In a sense, the kernel is what is actually in control of your computer system. Everything on top, like windows and terminals, is just window dressing.

At the even lower level is the *BIOS*, alongside *firmware*. These are pieces of baked-in software which are inside the actual hardware of your PC, and tell each component how to operate. The combination of firmware and hardware determines how each pin on the hardware behaves electronically. 

## Shells and Interaction 

A computer system is useful because it provides both a way to operate on data, a way to display that data and a way to store that data. Processing power enables the system to execute instructions, a storage drive enables the system to store data, a shell / interface allows you to interact with the system and provide high-level instructions, and a display allows you to look at the results easily. 

Interaction is how we give commands and high-level instructions to the computer and provide input that does not currently exist on the system. When we say *high-level*, we generally mean *more abstract* -- the higher we go, the less we care about *low-level* details of how our task is achieved. The opposite of abstract is *concrete* -- caring about specific, real details and implementation. To facilitate human interaction with a system made of electrons, we use *interaction metaphors* to make it easier to think about. We tend to organize data on a computer in the abstract metaphor of files and folders. We tend to move documents around on our screen as if it were the top of our desk. One might even call it a *desktop*. This is the typical graphical user interface.

At the typical level of user metaphor, it doesn't matter to us how a document is represented internally. We care only that it fulfills its function. When we need to, we know enough to replace the drive when it goes bad. But generally we don't care. Instead, we tend to care about documents and ongoing processes.

The command-line interface is textual and does not display graphics (at least not usually). However, besides the window/desktop metaphor, almost every other interaction metaphor holds from the command line. A *terminal* is the way you access the command-line. In older days, this would be a separate device. Now, it is typically just opened in a window on your machine. A *shell* is the program that interacts with the system for you. For example, if I open up the command prompt in Windows and type "del C:/Windows/System32", the shell interprets my command: It sees the first argument, "del", and locates a program by that name. It then passes the rest of my command as arguments to "del". "Del" then deletes the directory which it received by argument.

In Linux, many shells are available such as bash, zsh, fish, and so on, although bash is most common. In Windows, there is the Command Prompt (cmd) and PowerShell. PowerShell and cmd differ in some key ways so please be aware that not all commands will work in both. However, the general form of 
```
PROGRAM ARGUMENT1 ARGUMENT2 ARGUMENT3... 
```

typically holds across all shells. PowerShell is designed to be more "scriptable" compared to cmd, whereas bash etcetera in Linux were designed like that from the beginning.

How does the shell locate a program? What if I have two programs with the same name?

Some shells have commands hard-coded in -- that is, certain commands to the shell will run special code in the shell itself, rather than an external program. However, most commands exist as programs somewhere on your PC. The shell locates these using something called the PATH.

The PATH is a list of directories on your PC. When you enter a command, the shell first looks in *the current working directory*. Every shell keeps track of where you "currently are" in the directory structure, and this is the current working directory, or CWD. To change the CWD in Windows, you type "cd" followed by the directory you want to change to. By default, many programs produce file output to the CWD. You can also use "." to refer to the CWD, or ".." to refer to its parent. If the shell does not find the program, it then iterates over every directory listed in the PATH and searches for a program with the given name. If it finds it, it invokes that program. Otherwise, it moves to the next directory and searches there. Because it is used in this way, the PATH is an *ordered list*. If the program is not found in any of the PATH directories, you will receive an error.

In fact, the PATH is just one of something called *environment variables*. Environment variables are variables, each with a name and a value, accessible from the shell based on some configuration. In Windows, these can be changed from the control panel. 

When you initiate a program from Windows, it reads the system configuration (accessible by the control panel) and loads the environment variables. Worth noting is that, unless special mechanisms are used, each child process inherits the environment variables from its parent. When a process is first loaded, it keeps track of the current environment variables. Hence, environment variables that are changed in windows configuration will not be reflected in a process until you restart the top-level process. This is why, when you make changes to environment variables, you must restart the shell to see changes.

Most command line programs have a similar interface. Usually, you pass parameters to command line programs with space-separated options beginning with - or --. For example, you can often verify that a piece of software was properly installed just by running it with "--version". Often, "--help" / "-h" or "--usage" bring up information on how to use the program. If you are regularly using command line-based tools, you will use these often. In the worst case, usually just running the program without arguments will print the usage info (this doesn't apply to some programs, like python, which will instead launch an interactive interpreter.)

On that note, some programs act like interactive shells themselves. As described, the Python executable, run without arguments, will bring up "IPython", which is an interactive prompt for running snippets of Python code. You will notice that your prompt line changes to ">>>", indicating that you are not in your normal shell. This type of interface is also called a *REPL*: Read Execute Print Loop, because it reads your input, executes it, prints output, then loops back to receive more input. This is useful for testing out small snippets of Python code on an ad-hoc basis, but is of limited usefulness for anything more complex. When you want to leave it, you can do so "the proper way" by just typing exit(), or you can use Ctrl-C. Ctrl-C is a standard hotkey for terminating the current process from most shells, although sometimes it needs to be spammed.

## Executables and Libraries

An executable is a program file that can be run directly. You are most likely familiar with the ".exe" file extension used in Windows to distinguish executable files.  However, other forms of executable code exist. A *library* is a collection of executable code *without an entry point*. That is, you can't (usually) run a library by itself. Rather, a library exists for other programs to use and acts as source of knowledge on how to do specific things (kind of like a real library, huh?)

We will go into this in more depth when we talk about linking, but it is sufficient for review purposes to remember that *shared libraries* are libraries which can be shared across programs -- multiple programs access the same file, when needed, to execute function code which does not exist in the program itself. Historically this was done to save space and memory, and so that multiple programs could benefit from updates/upgrades to the same library of functionality. However, this turns out to be a lot harder in practice. By convention, shared libraries are often labeled as .dll files on Windows and as .so files on Linux/UNIX. 

When software complains about missing DLLs or that you need Visual C++ 2018 runtimes, really what they mean is that you're missing (or the software cannot find) the proper shared libraries. 

Libraries can also be bundled into a program, in which case they are *static* libraries (usually .lib on windows, .a on Linux).


## Conclusion

You could take multiple courses on specifically how operating systems work and all the mechanisms they manage. Many undergraduate courses on this topic (usually in CS departments, sometimes in IT departments) actually involve you writing your own rudimentary operating system. For the purposes of this course, we will not be writing programs which require knowledge on OS specifics.  However, you will find that understanding the information in this review will help with troubleshooting when things go wrong.