This series of lecture notes is about *communications*. That's awfully vague, isn't it?

Let me clarify. We will not be covering *telecommunications* in the sense of discussing electromagnetic waves propagating through the air and being converted to signals, nor will we cover *coding theory* about how much redundancy needs to be included in a message to sufficiently error correct, nor we will cover how a set of voltage signals on a cable ultimately becomes information on your computer. Those would be variously covered by an EE course on telecom signals, an IT course on networking or a CS course on information theory. We won't cover those lower level details here unless we need to.

No, we will be talking about how to make our software communicate in a broader sense.

We might break this down into two types of communication:

- Network communication, where we communicate with other computers
and
- Inter-process communication, where we communicate with other software running on the same computer.

After all, we have learned that composing different software components together enables us to do very powerful things. But this isn't just limited to calling libraries. Sometimes, we want entire compiled executable programs to be our components. Other times, we want to treat entire *networks of computers* as components! These are some seriously high-scale behaviors.

In this series of lecture notes, we will discuss basic ideas behind software which communicates over the internet and which interacts with the vast sea of information that we call the Web. We will also briefly cover a few ideas about how multiple programs on your computer can pass information between each other.

The corresponding lab will have you build real programs which use these ideas.