In this section, we will discuss something fairly basic: If we have software installed, how do we use it?

I don't necessarily mean "double click on the shortcut icon", I mean how do we make software which calls *other* software on your computer?

But before we tackle that, wait. How *does* double-clicking cause my computer to run software? What about the shell? Aren't those *also* pieces of software calling other pieces of software? 

At some underlying level, they are making what is called a *system call*. 
All a system call does is call out to the system to do something that the program itself does not know how to do. For instance, many low-level OS tasks are handled with system calls. But what we are interested in is how we might call another program. 

This is the simplest kind of communication we can imagine --  we have an executable program on our computer which produces some output we want, and we want to just invoke it from a different program, kind of the same way in which we would call a function.

Thankfully, this is pretty easy. All we have to do is provide a command, and it will execute as if we ran it from the command line. In this case, the process(es) we create are "child processes" of our own software process.

To run an arbitrary command, as if from the shell, in Python:
``` python
import os
os.system("echo 'You gotta be assfucking my clown dick right now'")
```
And in C++:
``` cpp
std::string commandString = "echo ClownDick";
// But wait! std::strings are not "char*" which system() expects as parameter!
// Need to get the C-string form of our C++ std::string to use with system()
system(commandString.c_str());
```

In the context of a console program, system calls will produce their output to the current terminal. But if executed from a GUI application or something, they may not necessarily show up at all. This specific topic gets deep but don't worry about that for now.

The point is that we can construct, through code, arbitrary commands. We can then call those commands with a system call, and get their *exit code* back as a result. Remember when we talked about program entrypoints returning exit codes? Here is where they're useful. An exit code of 0 conventionally means the program succeeded in whatever it tried to do. Any other number returned indicates some kind of failure. Sometimes the specific exit code tells you something about how or why it failed, sometimes not. If you run into error codes when running programs, try googling them!

You can run any arbitrary program. The command is executed as if in the current environment. Consider that for a second: If I set an environment variable in a shell, temporarily, then run a process from that shell, that edited variable will be visible to that process and any child processes it spawns. An individual process can, itself, edit the current environment so that its children will see a different value, and so on.

The only thing that limits you with these system calls is your knowledge of the options that the program you are calling expects. Hence, the "command-line interface" of a program isn't *just* for you as a user -- it's also there for programs to talk to each other.

This is just one program calling another... not very sophisticated. Sometimes, this is all you need: make some file somewhere, call a program to edit that file, then when the program returns, grab that new file and display it. This works especially well if we just have a single file, in a single well-known place.

But other times, that isn't enough. Spawning new processes is (relatively) slow, and we're relying on passing data through text. Sure, it works for strings and filenames and stuff, but what about really complex data objects? We don't want to burden our program with all this extra logic about how to use commands, do we?

So more sophisticated methods of passing data between programs were devised. 
